.TH CX 1 "2026-03-12" "cx 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
cx \- curses-exec: interactive line selector with configurable command execution
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B command
.B |
.B cx
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cx
reads lines from standard input, displays them in a scrollable full-screen
terminal interface, and executes shell commands against the selected line
when the user presses a configured key.
.PP
Navigation uses vim-style key bindings.
Actions are defined in
.I ~/.cx.yaml
as a list of rules, each pairing a regular expression pattern and a key
character with a shell command template.
Capture groups from the pattern are available as placeholders in the command.
.PP
.B cx
is intentionally general.
The same tool handles process management, git history browsing, Docker
container control, log inspection, and any other task that follows the
pattern of selecting a line and acting on extracted text.
.
.SH USAGE
.B cx
must be invoked at the end of a pipeline.
It reads all of stdin before entering the interactive display,
then reopens
.I /dev/tty
for keyboard input so that curses can function correctly inside a pipe.
.PP
Examples:
.RS
.nf
ps \-ax | cx
git log \-\-oneline | cx
docker ps | cx
find /var/log \-name '*.log' | cx
kubectl get pods \-A | grep CrashLoop | cx
.fi
.RE
.
.SH NAVIGATION
.TP
.BR j ", down-arrow"
Move selection down one line.
.TP
.BR k ", up-arrow"
Move selection up one line.
.TP
.B g
Jump to the first line.
.TP
.B G
Jump to the last line.
.TP
.BR "Ctrl\-F" ", " "Page Down"
Scroll down one page.
.TP
.BR "Ctrl\-B" ", " "Page Up"
Scroll up one page.
.TP
.BR q ", " Esc
Quit
.BR cx .
.PP
Any other printable character triggers rule matching against the selected line.
If no rule matches, the status bar shows a brief error message.
If exactly one rule matches, the command runs immediately.
If multiple rules match, a selection menu appears at the bottom of the screen.
.
.SH COMMAND EXECUTION
When a rule matches, its command template is interpolated (see
.B TEMPLATE VARIABLES
below) and passed to
.IR "/bin/sh \-c" .
.PP
.B cx
suspends the curses display before running the command, so the command
has full access to the terminal.
Interactive commands such as
.BR vim (1),
.BR less (1),
.BR ssh (1),
and
.B docker exec \-it
work correctly.
.PP
After the command exits, the user is prompted to press any key, then the
.B cx
display resumes.
.
.SH CONFIG FILE
.B cx
reads
.I ~/.cx.yaml
on startup.
If the file does not exist,
.B cx
runs in navigation-only mode with no actions available.
.PP
The file must be valid YAML.
The top-level key is
.BR rules ,
which is a list of rule objects.
.
.SS Rule fields
.TP
.B pattern
.I (required)
A Python regular expression.
Matched against the selected line using
.IR re.search ,
so the pattern does not need to anchor to the start of the line unless desired.
Use parentheses for capture groups and
.BI (?P< name >...)
for named groups.
.TP
.B key
.I (required)
A single character.
Case-sensitive:
.B k
and
.B K
are different keys.
Multiple rules may share the same key; the rule whose
.B pattern
matches the current line is selected.
.TP
.B command
.I (required)
A shell command template.
Passed to
.IR "/bin/sh \-c" .
Shell features such as pipes, redirects, and variable expansion are available.
See
.B TEMPLATE VARIABLES
for placeholder syntax.
.TP
.B description
.I (optional)
A short label shown in the multi-rule selection menu and in the status bar
after a command runs.
Defaults to the
.B command
string if omitted.
.
.SS Example config
.RS
.nf
rules:
  - pattern: '^\\s*(\\d+)'
    key: k
    command: 'kill {1}'
    description: 'Send SIGTERM'

  - pattern: '^\\s*(\\d+)'
    key: K
    command: 'kill -9 {1}'
    description: 'Send SIGKILL'

  - pattern: '^([0-9a-f]{7,40})'
    key: d
    command: 'git show {1} | less'
    description: 'Show commit diff'
.fi
.RE
.
.SH TEMPLATE VARIABLES
Before a command is executed, the following placeholders in the
.B command
string are replaced:
.TP
.B {line}
The full text of the selected line, exactly as it appeared in the input.
.TP
.B {0}
The substring of the line that the
.B pattern
matched (the full regex match, not the whole line unless the pattern spans it).
.TP
.BR {1} ", " {2} ", " ...
The text captured by the first, second, ... parenthesised group in
.BR pattern .
.TP
.BI { name }
The text captured by the named group
.BI (?P< name >...)
in
.BR pattern .
.PP
Placeholders are substituted as plain strings without shell escaping.
If a captured value may contain whitespace or shell metacharacters, quote
the placeholder in the command:
.PP
.RS
.nf
command: 'grep \-r "{1}" /var/log'
.fi
.RE
.PP
An unrecognised placeholder (one that does not correspond to any group or
reserved name) is left unchanged in the command string.
.
.SH MULTIPLE MATCHING RULES
When the user presses a key and more than one rule with that key has a
.B pattern
that matches the current line, a selection overlay appears at the bottom of
the screen listing the matching rules by their
.B description
fields.
.PP
Navigate the menu with
.BR j / k ,
confirm with
.BR Enter ,
and cancel with
.BR Esc .
.
.SH STATUS BAR
The bottom row of the display is reserved for a status bar showing:
.PP
.RS
.I " <current>/<total>  <message>"
.RE
.PP
.I current
and
.I total
are the 1-based index of the selected line and the total number of lines.
.I message
reports the last action taken or an error if no rule matched.
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Process management
.RS
.nf
ps \-ax | cx
.fi
.RE
With rules keyed on the leading PID field, browse processes and send signals
without leaving the list.
.
.SS Git history
.RS
.nf
git log \-\-oneline | cx
git log \-\-oneline \-\-author=alice | cx
.fi
.RE
Navigate commits and run
.BR "git show" ,
.BR "git checkout" ,
or
.B "git cherry-pick"
by pressing a single key.
.
.SS Docker
.RS
.nf
docker ps | cx
docker ps \-a | cx
.fi
.RE
Stop, remove, exec into, or tail logs of containers interactively.
.
.SS Log inspection
.RS
.nf
journalctl \-n 500 | cx
tail \-n 200 /var/log/syslog | cx
.fi
.RE
Select a log line and grep for surrounding context, or open the full log
with
.BR less .
.
.SS Filtering before entry
.PP
Because
.B cx
reads from stdin, any pipeline is valid input:
.RS
.nf
ps \-ax | grep python | cx
find . \-name '*.log' \-newer /tmp/ts | cx
kubectl get pods \-A | grep \-v Running | cx
.fi
.RE
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.cx.yaml
User configuration file.
Contains the
.B rules
list.
Read once on startup; changes require restarting
.BR cx .
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Normal exit (user pressed
.B q
or
.BR Esc ).
.TP
.B 1
Invoked without piped input, no input received, or a fatal config error.
.
.SH DIAGNOSTICS
If
.I ~/.cx.yaml
contains a rule with an invalid regular expression or a multi-character key,
.B cx
prints a descriptive error message to stderr and exits with status 1 before
opening the curses display.
.PP
If a rule's command fails at runtime, the error output is shown in the terminal
after the command exits and before the prompt to return to
.BR cx .
.
.SH CAVEATS
.B cx
uses
.IR re.search ,
not
.IR re.match ,
so patterns are not anchored to the start of the line by default.
To match from the beginning of a line, prefix the pattern with
.BR ^ .
.PP
Template substitution is positional: the first
.B (...)
group is always
.BR {1} ,
regardless of the order named groups appear.
Mixing numbered and named placeholders in the same command is supported.
.PP
Commands are run with
.I SHELL=sh
via
.IR "subprocess.run(cmd, shell=True)" .
The user's login shell is not consulted.
Shell functions and aliases defined in
.I ~/.bashrc
or
.I ~/.zshrc
are not available unless the command explicitly sources them.
.PP
There is no undo.
Commands such as
.BR kill ,
.BR "docker rm \-f" ,
and
.BR "rm"
act immediately on confirmation.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR less (1),
.BR ps (1),
.BR kill (1),
.BR grep (1),
.BR pgrep (1),
.BR fzf (1)
.
.SH AUTHOR
Written by the project contributors.
.
.SH BUGS
Report bugs at the project issue tracker.
